.TH ARGUS 8 "2026-03-22" "argus 0.4.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
argus \- eBPF-based Linux syscall telemetry and threat-detection daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B argus
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B argus
is a Linux kernel telemetry and intrusion-detection tool built on eBPF.
It traces process execution, file access, network connections, privilege
escalation, memory-resident shellcode, kernel module loads, and many other
security-relevant events system-wide with sub-millisecond latency and
minimal overhead.
.PP
Every event carries the full process ancestry
.RB ( systemd\(->sshd\(->bash\(->curl ),
container cgroup attribution, and (optionally) MITRE ATT&CK tactic/technique
tags.
.PP
After all BPF programs are attached and the ring buffer file descriptor is
open, argus drops from root to
.B nobody
so the event loop runs with minimal privilege.
A seccomp denylist filter is then applied that prevents the event-loop code
from executing new programs, forking processes, calling ptrace, or changing
credentials even if the process is exploited.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS General
.TP
.BI \-\-config " path"
Load a JSON configuration file.
Argus loads
.I /etc/argus/config.json
and
.I ~/.config/argus/config.json
automatically at startup.
CLI flags always override config file values.
.TP
.B \-\-config\-check
Print the active configuration and exit without attaching BPF programs.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show a usage summary and exit.
.SS Filtering
.TP
.BI \-\-pid " pid"
Only trace this PID (enforced in kernel via BPF map).
.TP
.BI \-\-follow " pid"
Trace
.I pid
and all descendant processes.
The BPF
.B sched_process_fork
tracepoint propagates the tracked set automatically.
.TP
.BI \-\-comm " name"
Only trace processes whose comm equals
.I name
(enforced in kernel).
.TP
.BI \-\-path " str"
Only show events whose filename contains
.I str
(userspace filter).
.TP
.BI \-\-exclude " prefix"
Exclude file events (OPEN, UNLINK, RENAME, CHMOD) whose path starts with
.I prefix
(userspace filter, repeatable up to 8 times).
.TP
.BI \-\-events " list"
Comma-separated list of event types to enable.
Valid types:
.BR EXEC ,
.BR OPEN ,
.BR EXIT ,
.BR CONNECT ,
.BR UNLINK ,
.BR RENAME ,
.BR CHMOD ,
.BR BIND ,
.BR PTRACE ,
.BR DNS ,
.BR SEND ,
.BR WRITE_CLOSE ,
.BR PRIVESC ,
.BR MEMEXEC ,
.BR KMOD_LOAD ,
.BR THREAT_INTEL ,
.BR PROC_SCRAPE ,
.BR NS_ESCAPE .
Specifying this flag prevents unused BPF programs from loading entirely.
.SS Output
.TP
.BI \-\-output\-fmt " fmt"
Set output format.
Valid values:
.BR text " (default human-readable table),"
.BR json " (newline-delimited JSON),"
.BR syslog " (syslog via LOG_DAEMON),"
.BR cef " (ArcSight Common Event Format for SIEM integration)."
.TP
.B \-\-json
Shorthand for
.BR "\-\-output\-fmt json" .
.TP
.B \-\-syslog
Shorthand for
.BR "\-\-output\-fmt syslog" .
.TP
.BI \-\-output " path"
Append event stream to
.I path
instead of stdout.
.TP
.BI \-\-summary " secs"
Print a rolling summary every
.I secs
seconds instead of per-event output.
.TP
.BI \-\-ringbuf " kb"
Ring buffer size in KB (default: 256, range: 4\-65536).
Increase on high-event-rate hosts if drop warnings appear.
.TP
.BI \-\-pid\-file " path"
Write the daemon PID to
.I path
at startup.
The file is removed when argus exits.
.SS Performance
.TP
.BI \-\-rate\-limit " n"
Drop events after
.I n
per second per comm name (0 = off, kernel-enforced token bucket).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-drop\-privs
Stay root after BPF attach.
Not recommended; intended for debugging.
.SS Forwarding
.TP
.BI \-\-forward " host:port"
Stream every matched event as newline-delimited JSON over a persistent TCP
connection.
Reconnects automatically with exponential backoff (1\-30 s).
Repeatable; up to 4 targets.
.TP
.B \-\-forward\-tls
Enable TLS for the most recently specified
.B \-\-forward
target with server certificate verification.
Requires OpenSSL at build time.
.TP
.B \-\-forward\-tls\-noverify
Enable TLS without certificate verification
(useful for self-signed certificates in private networks).
.SS Anomaly detection
.TP
.BI \-\-baseline " path"
Load a learnt per-comm behavioural profile from
.I path
and emit anomaly alerts for deviations.
.TP
.BI \-\-baseline\-learn " secs"
Learn a baseline profile for
.I secs
seconds, then write it and stop learning.
.TP
.BI \-\-baseline\-out " path"
Write the learnt profile to
.I path
(default:
.IR baseline.json ).
.TP
.BI \-\-rules " path"
Load alert rules from a JSON file.
Matching events emit alerts to stderr (text mode) or inline
.B {"type":"ALERT"}
objects (JSON mode).
Rules are reloaded on SIGHUP without restart.
.TP
.BI \-\-syscall\-anom " secs"
Enable syscall-frequency anomaly detection using a chi-squared test.
The BPF
.B handle_sys_enter
program samples syscall histograms; after each
.I secs
interval the userspace engine flags processes whose distribution deviates
significantly from their historical baseline.
0 disables the feature and prevents the BPF program from loading.
.SS Enterprise: threat intelligence & enrichment
.TP
.B \-\-mitre\-tags
Annotate each alert with the matching MITRE ATT&CK tactic and technique ID.
The mapping is compiled into the binary; no network access is required.
.TP
.BI \-\-vt\-api\-key " key"
VirusTotal API key for IOC enrichment.
When set, EXEC and CONNECT events are enriched with VT reputation scores
via HTTPS in a background thread.
.TP
.BI \-\-otx\-api\-key " key"
AlienVault OTX API key for IP/domain reputation lookups.
.TP
.BI \-\-exec\-hash
Compute a SHA-256 hash of each executed binary and annotate EXEC events with
the
.B sha256
field.
When
.B \-\-vt\-api\-key
is also set, the hash is submitted to VirusTotal.
.TP
.BI \-\-container\-enrich
Query the Docker socket
.RI ( /var/run/docker.sock )
to enrich events with container name, image, and labels.
.SS Enterprise: response
.TP
.B \-\-response\-isolate
Automatically add iptables DROP rules to block outbound connections from
processes that trigger THREAT_INTEL events.
Rules are removed on clean exit.
Requires
.BR iptables (8)
in PATH.
.TP
.B \-\-lsm\-deny
Use the LSM BPF hook to block execve calls that match alert rules with
.B action: deny
(requires kernel \(>= 5.7 with
.BR CONFIG_BPF_LSM=y ).
.SS Enterprise: storage
.TP
.BI \-\-store\-path " path"
Persist all events to a SQLite database at
.IR path .
Requires SQLite3 at build time.
.TP
.BI \-\-store\-query\-port " port"
Expose a minimal HTTP query API on
.BI 127.0.0.1: port
for the SQLite event store.
.RS
.TP
.B GET /query?type=EXEC&limit=100
Return recent events as a JSON array, optionally filtered by type.
.TP
.B GET /stats
Return row count and database file size.
.RE
.SS Enterprise: compliance
.TP
.BI \-\-compliance " framework"
Map observed events to controls in the specified compliance framework.
Valid values:
.BR cis " (CIS Controls for Linux),"
.BR pci\-dss " (PCI DSS 4.0 requirements 10\-12),"
.BR nist " (NIST Cybersecurity Framework),"
.BR soc2 " (SOC 2 Type II CC6\-CC9)."
.TP
.BI \-\-compliance\-report " path"
Write an HTML compliance evidence report to
.I path
on clean exit.
Each triggered control shows a timestamp, event type, and process context.
.SS Enterprise: TLS inspection & memory forensics
.TP
.B \-\-tls\-data
Attach uprobes to OpenSSL
.B SSL_read
to capture decrypted TLS payload (first 256 bytes) as
.B EVENT_TLS_DATA
events.
Requires the target process to link against
.BR libssl.so .
0 disables the feature and prevents the SSL uprobe programs from loading.
.TP
.B \-\-mem\-forensics
On each
.B EVENT_MEMEXEC
(anonymous executable mapping), walk
.I /proc/<pid>/maps
and read the content via
.IR /proc/<pid>/mem ,
compute Shannon entropy, and optionally scan with YARA rules.
High-entropy anonymous executable regions indicate shellcode or packed payloads.
.SS Enterprise: alerting
.TP
.BI \-\-webhook " url"
POST JSON alert objects to
.I url
via HTTP in a background thread.
A 64-entry queue absorbs burst traffic; excess alerts are dropped and counted.
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.SS Text (default)
A human-readable table with columns
.BR TYPE ,
.BR PID ,
.BR PPID ,
.BR USER ,
.BR GID ,
.BR COMM ,
.BR CGROUP ,
.BR LINEAGE ,
and
.BR DETAIL .
The USER column shows the username from
.I /etc/passwd
when available.
.SS JSON (\-\-json / \-\-output\-fmt json)
One JSON object per line (NDJSON).
CONNECT and BIND events include a
.B hostname
field populated by reverse-DNS lookup.
EXEC events include a
.B user
field when the uid can be resolved, and a
.B sha256
field when
.B \-\-exec\-hash
is active.
.SS CEF (\-\-output\-fmt cef)
ArcSight Common Event Format v0, suitable for direct ingestion by Splunk,
ArcSight, QRadar, and other SIEMs.
Format:
.IR "CEF:0|argus|argus|version|SignatureID|Name|Severity|Extension" .
.SS Syslog (\-\-syslog / \-\-output\-fmt syslog)
All events go to
.BR syslog (3)
at
.BR LOG_INFO / LOG_DAEMON .
Overrides file output.
.SH EVENT TYPES
.TP
.B EXEC
.BR execve (2)
/
.BR execveat (2)
— process execution.
Fields:
.BR filename ,
.BR args ,
.BR duration_ns .
.TP
.B OPEN
.BR openat (2)
— file open.
Fields:
.BR filename ,
.BR open_flags ,
.BR success ,
.BR duration_ns .
.TP
.B EXIT
.BR sched_process_exit
— process termination.
Field:
.BR exit_code .
.TP
.B CONNECT
.BR connect (2)
— outbound network connection.
Fields:
.BR family ,
.BR daddr ,
.BR hostname ,
.BR dport ,
.BR success .
.TP
.B UNLINK
.BR unlinkat (2)
— file deletion.
Fields:
.BR filename ,
.BR success .
.TP
.B RENAME
.BR renameat2 (2)
— file rename.
Fields:
.BR filename
(old),
.BR new_path ,
.BR success .
.TP
.B CHMOD
.BR fchmodat (2)
— permission change.
Fields:
.BR filename ,
.BR mode ,
.BR success .
.TP
.B BIND
.BR bind (2)
— socket bind.
Fields:
.BR family ,
.BR laddr ,
.BR lport ,
.BR success .
.TP
.B PTRACE
.BR ptrace (2)
— process tracing call.
Fields:
.BR ptrace_req ,
.BR target_pid ,
.BR success .
.TP
.B DNS
Outbound DNS query (
.BR sendto (2)
on UDP port 53).
Fields:
.BR query
(decoded QNAME),
.BR daddr ,
.BR dport .
.TP
.B SEND
First 128 bytes of any
.BR sendto (2)
payload (non-DNS).
Fields:
.BR daddr ,
.BR dport ,
.BR payload_len .
.TP
.B WRITE_CLOSE
.BR close (2)
on a write-mode file descriptor — indicates a file was written.
Field:
.BR filename .
.TP
.B PRIVESC
Privilege escalation:
.BR setuid (2)
/
.BR setresuid (2)
to uid 0, or
.BR capset (2)
with a dangerous capability.
Fields:
.BR uid_before ,
.BR uid_after ,
.BR cap_data .
.TP
.B MEMEXEC
.BR mmap (2)
/
.BR mprotect (2)
with
.B PROT_EXEC
on an anonymous mapping — indicates shellcode or reflective injection.
Fields:
.BR prot ,
.BR mmap_flags .
.TP
.B KMOD_LOAD
.BR init_module (2)
/
.BR finit_module (2)
— kernel module load.
Field:
.BR filename .
.TP
.B NET_CORR
Synthetic event (userspace-generated).
Emitted when a DNS query is followed by a connection to a resolved address
within 30 seconds.
Fields:
.BR dns_name ,
.BR daddr ,
.BR dport .
.TP
.B RATE_LIMIT
Emitted when a PID exceeds the rate limit set by
.BR \-\-rate\-limit .
.TP
.B THREAT_INTEL
A
.BR connect (2)
destination matched an entry in the threat-intelligence blocklist.
Fields:
.BR daddr ,
.BR dport .
.TP
.B TLS_SNI
TLS ClientHello SNI hostname captured via uprobe on
.BR SSL_write .
Field:
.BR sni .
.TP
.B PROC_SCRAPE
A foreign process read
.IR /proc/<pid>/mem ,
.IR /proc/<pid>/maps ,
or
.IR /proc/<pid>/fd .
Fields:
.BR target_pid ,
.BR path .
.TP
.B NS_ESCAPE
.BR setns (2)
/
.BR unshare (2)
/
.BR clone (2)
call with
.B CLONE_NEW*
flags, indicating a namespace escape attempt.
Field:
.BR ns_flags .
.TP
.B TLS_DATA
Decrypted TLS payload (first 256 bytes) captured via uprobe on
.BR SSL_read .
Requires
.BR \-\-tls\-data .
Fields:
.BR tls_payload_len .
.TP
.B HEARTBEAT
Internal liveness ping emitted by the agent event loop every 30 seconds.
Used by
.B argus-server
to track agent health and detect stale connections.
.SH CONFIG FILE
Argus loads
.I /etc/argus/config.json
then
.I ~/.config/argus/config.json
on startup (if present).
All keys are optional; unset keys retain their compiled-in defaults.
Unknown keys produce a warning on stderr.
.PP
.nf
{
    "pid":                    0,
    "follow_pid":             0,
    "comm":                   "",
    "path":                   "",
    "exclude_paths":          ["/proc", "/sys", "/dev"],
    "event_types":            ["EXEC","OPEN","EXIT","CONNECT",
                               "UNLINK","RENAME","CHMOD","BIND","PTRACE"],
    "ring_buffer_kb":         256,
    "summary_interval":       0,
    "rate_limit_per_comm":    0,
    "output_path":            "",
    "output_fmt":             "text",
    "pid_file":               "",
    "syslog":                 false,
    "rules":                  "",
    "forward":                "",
    "forward_tls":            false,
    "forward_tls_noverify":   false,
    "targets": [
        {"addr": "siem1.corp:9000"},
        {"addr": "siem2.corp:9000", "tls": true}
    ],
    "baseline":               "",
    "baseline_out":           "",
    "baseline_learn_secs":    0,
    "threat_intel":           "",
    "fim_paths":              ["/etc", "/usr/bin", "/usr/sbin"],
    "yara_rules_dir":         "",
    "metrics_port":           0,
    "lsm_deny":               false,
    "mitre_tags":             false,
    "webhook_url":            "",
    "exec_hash":              false,
    "vt_api_key":             "",
    "otx_api_key":            "",
    "response_isolate":       false,
    "store_path":             "",
    "store_query_port":       0,
    "container_enrich":       false,
    "compliance_framework":   "",
    "compliance_report":      "",
    "syscall_anom_interval":  0,
    "tls_data_enable":        false,
    "mem_forensics":          false
}
.fi
.PP
Send
.B SIGHUP
to reload the config without restarting.
.SH SECURITY
.SS Privilege drop
After attaching all BPF programs and opening the ring buffer,
.B argus
drops from root to
.B nobody
(uid 65534) via
.BR setuid (2)
/
.BR setgid (2).
All open file descriptors remain valid.
Pass
.B \-\-no\-drop\-privs
to disable.
.SS Seccomp filter
Immediately after the privilege drop a seccomp BPF denylist is installed.
The filter blocks the following syscalls with
.BR EPERM :
.BR execve ,
.BR execveat ,
.BR fork ,
.BR vfork ,
.BR ptrace ,
.BR setuid ,
.BR setgid ,
.BR setresuid ,
.BR setresgid ,
.BR mount ,
.BR init_module ,
.BR finit_module ,
.BR kexec_load ,
.BR kexec_file_load .
All other syscalls are allowed.
The filter is combined with
.BR PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS .
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT / SIGTERM
Graceful shutdown: flush baseline profile (if learning), write final drop
count, write compliance report (if enabled), remove all iptables isolation
rules (if
.B \-\-response\-isolate
is active), and remove the pid-file.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload configuration files, update BPF filter maps (pid/comm allowlists,
rate limit), reload alert rules, and update userspace filters.
The event type mask and ring buffer size cannot change at runtime.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/argus/config.json
System-wide configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.config/argus/config.json
Per-user configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/argus/rules.json
Default alert rules location (configurable).
.TP
.I /etc/argus/baseline.json
Default baseline profile location (configurable).
.TP
.I /var/log/argus/events.jsonl
Default event log when installed as a systemd service.
.TP
.I /run/argus/argus.pid
Default PID file location.
.TP
.I /sys/kernel/btf/vmlinux
BTF (BPF Type Format) blob required for CO-RE.
Must exist; kernel 5.8+ with
.B CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF=y
required.
.TP
.I /var/run/docker.sock
Docker socket used by
.B \-\-container\-enrich
to resolve container metadata.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Linux kernel 5.8 or newer with BTF enabled
.RB ( CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF=y ).
Must run as root or with
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
+
.B CAP_BPF
+
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN .
.PP
Optional:
SQLite3 (for
.BR \-\-store\-path ),
OpenSSL (for
.B \-\-forward\-tls
and
.BR \-\-tls\-data ),
YARA (for
.B \-\-mem\-forensics
YARA rule scanning),
iptables (for
.BR \-\-response\-isolate ).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Watch all process executions as JSON:
.B sudo argus \-\-events EXEC \-\-json
.TP
Monitor a specific process tree:
.B sudo argus \-\-follow $(pidof nginx | awk '{print $1}') \-\-json
.TP
Detect anomalies (learn 1 hour, then detect):
.nf
sudo argus \-\-baseline\-learn 3600 \-\-baseline\-out /etc/argus/baseline.json
sudo argus \-\-baseline /etc/argus/baseline.json \-\-json
.fi
.TP
Forward to two SIEM endpoints (one plain, one TLS):
.nf
sudo argus \-\-forward siem1.corp:9000 \\
           \-\-forward siem2.corp:9001 \-\-forward\-tls
.fi
.TP
CEF output for SIEM ingestion:
.B sudo argus \-\-output\-fmt cef \-\-output /var/log/argus/events.cef
.TP
Full enterprise stack — hash, IOC enrichment, compliance, storage:
.nf
sudo argus \-\-json \\
           \-\-exec\-hash \\
           \-\-vt\-api\-key $VT_KEY \\
           \-\-compliance pci\-dss \-\-compliance\-report /tmp/report.html \\
           \-\-store\-path /var/lib/argus/events.db \-\-store\-query\-port 8080
.fi
.TP
Automated isolation of threat-intel matches:
.B sudo argus \-\-threat\-intel /etc/argus/blocklist.txt \-\-response\-isolate \-\-json
.TP
Capture decrypted TLS payloads from curl:
.B sudo argus \-\-tls\-data \-\-comm curl \-\-json
.TP
Memory forensics on anonymous executable mappings:
.B sudo argus \-\-mem\-forensics \-\-events MEMEXEC \-\-json
.TP
Fleet deployment — run as a systemd service:
.nf
sudo install \-m755 argus /usr/local/bin/argus
sudo systemctl daemon\-reload
sudo systemctl enable \-\-now argus
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR argus\-server (8),
.BR bpftool (8),
.BR strace (1),
.BR auditd (8),
.BR seccomp (2),
.BR prctl (2),
.BR iptables (8)
.SH AUTHOR
argus project <https://github.com/DennisPrudlik/argus>
