.TH ARGUS\-SERVER 8 "2026-03-22" "argus 0.4.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
argus\-server \- fleet aggregation server for multiple argus sensors
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B argus\-server
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B argus\-server
is the fleet aggregation component of the argus suite.
It accepts concurrent NDJSON event streams from any number of
.BR argus (8)
sensor instances (configured with
.BR \-\-forward ),
enriches every event with the remote sensor IP as a
.B host
field, writes the merged stream to an output sink, and runs a
fleet-wide IOC correlation engine that fires alerts when the same
indicator appears on multiple hosts within a configurable time window.
.PP
Up to 64 sensors can be connected simultaneously.
The server uses a single
.BR select (2)
loop with no blocking I/O and is suitable for long-running unattended
operation as a systemd service.
.PP
Agent health is tracked via periodic HEARTBEAT events sent by each sensor.
Sensors that stop sending heartbeats are automatically evicted after a
configurable timeout.
If a sensor crashes and reconnects before the TCP half-close is detected,
the stale connection is closed as soon as the new connection sends its
first HEARTBEAT with the same
.B hostname
field.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-port " N"
TCP listen port (default: 9000).
Binds on all interfaces using a dual-stack IPv6 socket that also accepts
IPv4-mapped connections.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " path"
Append the merged event stream to
.I path
instead of stdout.
The file is opened in append mode so it is safe to rotate with
.BR logrotate (8).
.TP
.BI \-\-stats\-interval " secs"
Print a one-line connection summary to stderr every
.I secs
seconds (default: 60).
Set to 0 to disable.
.TP
.BI \-\-correlate\-window " secs"
Fleet correlation time window in seconds (default: 60).
IOC sightings older than this are expired before checking the threshold.
Set to 0 to disable fleet correlation entirely.
.TP
.BI \-\-correlate\-threshold " N"
Number of distinct sensor hosts that must report the same IOC within
.B \-\-correlate\-window
before a
.B [FLEET]
alert is emitted and a
.B FLEET_CORR
event is injected into the output stream (default: 3).
.TP
.BI \-\-mgmt\-port " N"
Start a minimal HTTP management API on
.BI 127.0.0.1: N
(default: 0 = disabled).
.RS
.TP
.B GET /agents
JSON array of connected sensor health objects.
Each entry includes
.BR ip ,
.BR version ,
.BR uptime_secs ,
.BR connected_secs ,
.BR lines ,
.BR last_heartbeat_secs ,
and
.BR status
.RB ( healthy / stale / missing / new ).
.TP
.B GET /stats
JSON object with
.BR agents ,
.BR total_lines ,
.BR uptime_secs ,
.BR corr_window ,
.BR corr_threshold .
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-hb\-timeout " secs"
Close sensor connections that have not sent a HEARTBEAT event for this
many seconds (default: 300).
Set to 0 to disable heartbeat-based eviction.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show a usage summary and exit.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Each line written to the output sink is a JSON object identical to what
the originating sensor would emit with
.BR \-\-json ,
with one additional field prepended:
.PP
.nf
{"host":"192.168.1.10","type":"EXEC","pid":1234,...}
.fi
.PP
Fleet correlation alerts are injected as synthetic events:
.PP
.nf
{"host":"fleet","type":"FLEET_CORR",
 "ioc":"CONNECT:1.2.3.4:443",
 "threshold":3,"window":60,
 "trigger_host":"10.0.0.5"}
.fi
.SH FLEET CORRELATION ENGINE
The correlation engine tracks the following IOC types across all
connected sensors:
.TP
.B CONNECT / THREAT_INTEL
Keyed on destination IP address and port.
Useful for detecting coordinated C2 activity.
.TP
.B EXEC / OPEN / WRITE_CLOSE / UNLINK / KMOD_LOAD
Keyed on filename.
Useful for detecting lateral movement and implant deployment.
.TP
.B PRIVESC / NS_ESCAPE / PTRACE
Keyed on comm (process name).
Useful for detecting coordinated privilege escalation campaigns.
.PP
When the same IOC is reported by
.B \-\-correlate\-threshold
or more distinct hosts within
.B \-\-correlate\-window
seconds, a
.B [FLEET]
message is printed to stderr and a
.B FLEET_CORR
JSON event is appended to the output stream.
Each IOC fires at most one alert (suppressed after the first threshold crossing).
.SH AGENT HEALTH
Each
.BR argus (8)
sensor sends a
.B HEARTBEAT
event every 30 seconds containing its version string, uptime, and hostname.
.B argus\-server
records the timestamp of the last heartbeat for each connection and
classifies each agent as:
.TP
.B healthy
Heartbeat received within the last 90 seconds.
.TP
.B stale
Last heartbeat was 90\-300 seconds ago.
.TP
.B missing
No heartbeat for more than 300 seconds; connection will be evicted.
.TP
.B new
Connection established but no heartbeat received yet.
.PP
When a sensor reconnects (e.g. after a crash) with the same hostname,
the old stale connection is closed immediately on receipt of the new
HEARTBEAT, preventing duplicate event streams.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT / SIGTERM
Graceful shutdown: drain pending data, close all client connections,
and flush the output file.
.TP
.B SIGPIPE
Ignored.
Broken sensor connections are detected by
.BR recv (2)
returning 0 and are cleaned up on the next
.BR select (2)
iteration.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Listen on the default port and write to a log file:
.B argus\-server \-\-output /var/log/argus/fleet.jsonl
.TP
Strict fleet correlation (alert if same C2 IP seen on 2+ hosts within 30 s):
.B argus\-server \-\-correlate\-threshold 2 \-\-correlate\-window 30
.TP
With management API and extended heartbeat timeout:
.B argus\-server \-\-mgmt\-port 8081 \-\-hb\-timeout 600 \-\-output /var/log/argus/fleet.jsonl
.TP
Query the management API:
.nf
curl \-s http://127.0.0.1:8081/agents | python3 \-m json.tool
curl \-s http://127.0.0.1:8081/stats
.fi
.TP
Run as a systemd service:
.nf
sudo systemctl enable \-\-now argus\-server
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/log/argus/fleet.jsonl
Default fleet event log when installed as a systemd service.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR argus (8),
.BR bpftool (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
argus project <https://github.com/DennisPrudlik/argus>
